- Be honest.
Do you still get excited when you hear
the Window startup sound?
- It reminds me of a magic time.
This feels like you know,
without it, there is no day
that you could start
- Microsoft: an indispensable
and inescapable force
for 50 years. The company
invented the software industry
and changed the world as we know it.
Transforming personal computing
from a nerdy curiosity into
a global necessity.
- I'll cheat a little bit.
With three CEOs spanning five decades,
each leader marked a distinct chapter in
technological history.
- The thing they all
have in common is this
extraordinary curiosity.
You know, Bill is more of a reader.
Steve studies numbers, finds
patterns and pictures in them
and loves talking with people.
Satya's like the Renaissance man CEO,
- The software giant, has
lasted this long by catching
and capitalizing on technology
waves constantly hedging
their bets over an uncertain future.
- We're always thinking about,
okay, what happens tomorrow?
What's gonna happen tomorrow?
Will the company keep going?
- They didn't catch them all,
but just enough to stay relevant today.
- There have been so many twists
and turns in the technological
road. When I was in charge,
you know, I'd sit up
all night thinking, oh,
we're gonna miss this,
we're gonna miss that.
The fact that we've been able to
navigate this changing environment,
kind of a miracle to me,
you know, here we are now,
you know, the road's
got all these AI twists
and turns that taught
you with a little bit
of advice from Steve
and I gets to to drive the
the car around these curves.
- Microsoft loomed large for years,
but as the land of tech
giants got more crowded
and more competitive, it seemed
to drift into the corporate
doldrums until Satya Nadella
and a big bet on OpenAI brought them
back into the zeitgeist.
But the next generation of Microsoft has
to do more than rely on
ChatGPT's strategic advantage.
- We're at a really pivotal moment here.
The company still needs
to figure out a consumer centric vision,
a consumer-first vision, but
it's not in Microsoft's DNA
and it remains to be
seen if they can do it.
- Welcome to Microsoft's 50th birthday.
We're gonna go inside
to watch the main event.
- Are we on The Circuit?
- You're on The Circuit.
- Right now?
- Just a cameo from the competition.
- Oh My God.
- I'll open the door for you.
- I love The Circuit!
Thank you.
- Welcome to the era of AI
Companions and of co-pilots.
It starts with Bill and Steve who are both
here with us today.
- Hi. We're waiting for Bill.
He's finishing up an interview
and then he's coming here.
- Okay, Bill, happy birthday.
- Thank you.
- 50 years. So it's 1975.
What's going on inside Bill's brain?
Did you and Paul think
you had something this
big in your hands?
- Well, we knew that
software would be important.
You know, we said when
people thought it was crazy,
a computer on every
desk and in every home.
And so we saw it as this
tool of empowerment.
- Microsoft's journey begins
with these two young hackers
in the Pacific Northwest,
Bill Gates and Paul Allen.
They started obsessing over
the emerging computer industry
after spotting this cover
of Popular Electronics.
It's rudimentary stuff
by today's standards,
a mini computer kit that you'd program
by punching holes into paper.
Gates and Alan were hooked
and developed a new
programming language for it.
That became the foundational
software for Microsoft.
- People probably remember
the Apple II, the TRS-80,
the Commodore PET, those
were the first computers
that sold literally in the millions,
and all of them included Microsoft Basics.
So the reason you could write
a program, try things out was
because we'd worked with
each of those companies.
Then the IBM PC comes along,
- IBM now had 50% market share
and was defining what a PC meant.
- Gates and Allen got their
software on the first IBM PCs
and in a stroke of business genius inked,
a non-exclusive deal, making it possible
for other manufacturers
like Apple to license it.
What was the scariest this-might-not-work
moment along the way?
- Well, there were times in
our relationship with IBM
that were very complicated.
Very early on in the
history of the company,
we had a dispute with our customer.
They weren't paying us. Thereafter,
I said, I'm gonna have
enough money in the bank
to pay everyone's salary for a year,
even if nobody pays me anything.
So I was very conservative financially
and we were always worried
that once somebody realized
what we realized, that
they might, you know,
do a good job as well.
So, you know, why didn't IBM
who had all the capital in the world
and great people, why
couldn't they do what we did?
And we thought, well, we're
more dedicated to software.
We're gonna price this
stuff super, super low
and make it available to everyone.
Welcome to the Microsoft
MS-DOS 5 upgrade training
It's...
New!
- Productivity software
was the hot new thing,
transforming the workforce
and Microsoft soon became
the company to work for
attracting people like this guy.
This is a classic throwback video.
- Yeah, I know.
My daughter makes a lot of fun
of my accent even here.
As you can see,
the most important architectural
requirement for this piece...
- So you're a technical
product manager here,
you're demoing Excel.
Who's that guy? Like what's
he thinking at that time?
- It was an Excel demo with a,
I think a DB2 connector back to at
that time a mini computer
and it was the beginning
of that client server era.
- Did that guy have any idea
he'd be running the place one day?
- No chance. I was like
hoping to stay there in my job
for the next month if I could.
I was lucky enough to get hired.
I never felt any job I was
doing at Microsoft somehow was a
path to the next job.
The job I was doing was
like the most exciting thing
that I could be doing
and I gave it it all and
and the rest is history.
- Nadella joined Microsoft in
1992 when the company started
to cement its position
as the default operating
system for the world.
- Really like the origin
of Microsoft was this idea
that you could make money
off of selling software.
Before that, everybody sold the hardware
and you got software with it,
but it was the idea that you
could have a software company
and that was really revolutionary.
- Dina Bass is a Bloomberg
tech reporter who's covered
Microsoft since 1999.
That's 25 years of war stories.
- There have been so
many like ebbs and flows
and waves and this and that.
Some of it is routine where,
you know, oh, another version
of Windows and some of it is
a 4:30 AM phone call on your
home phone with Microsoft PR
talking into your voicemail
about the fact that they're about
to launch a hostile takeover bid for Yahoo
and you are seven months pregnant
and you're like, "Nah."
Nah, nah.
When I moved to Seattle, it
was really a different place.
It was the late nineties
and there was just this
whole culture of the,
the stock had gone crazy in that decade.
So there was this whole culture
of Microsoft millionaires. Tech
- Tech employees are a unique breed.
Do they still call them
Microsofties?
I think so.
I mean, at least we progressed
from Microserfs, right?
Microsoft nearly dominated the PC market,
practically printing money
by selling new versions
of Windows and office.
But shipping software back then had an
entirely different meaning.
- When the company would
finish work on a product,
it was called RTM,
release to manufacturing.
That was when you froze the code
and you sent it off to the nice
people that published discs,
which for your younger
viewers is a circular thing
that you put in a computer.
There'd be cascading
turns of people, you know,
signing off on their own code,
signing off that they were done.
And at the end of it,
there was a giant party.
People would end up in the fountains,
people would end up getting
thrown into Lake Bill.
We saw Steve Ballmer jumping into
- Lake Bill.
- I like to be excited.
There was so much to be
excited about at Microsoft.
We were doing great things
and you know, trying to really,
if you will, be cheerleaders
for a whole industry and
that was a lot of fun.
- People brought Super Soakers to campus
and there was a giant water fight.
To basically to prepare for this,
Microsoft, which has a very nice
and pricey art collection,
would take the art down from the walls
because they didn't
want it to get damaged.
But it was a young culture
that was kind of fun,
which I think people don't
really associate with Microsoft.
- Microsoft reached a
pinnacle with the launch
of Windows 95.
It was a cultural moment.
- We had Jay Leno
and it was kind
of maybe the time when people
realized Microsoft was quite a
unique company. Office had come together,
the graphics interface had
come together, you know,
on all the different systems,
whether it was Apple Macintosh
or Windows on the PC,
we were providing the top application.
So that was definitely a fun
day that, you know, showed
that we had some special sauce.
- People lined up around the block
to get their hands on the
latest operating system, eager
to explore ways to click type
and create with computers.
Microsoft sold over 40 million
copies in its first year
- And in that moment there's
also kind of the seeds
of their kind of downfall
because in Windows 95 they don't have
anything internet-oriented.
They don't realize it's gonna be a thing
and all of a sudden you
see browsers come up,
you see the internet
start to become important
and they're completely flat-footed.
So you have a few things
going on at once in that kind
of canonical "evil empire" era.
- This is when the company
started to get in trouble
with the US government.
Microsoft was accused of
wielding its market power,
bundling its browser with Windows to try
to ride the internet wave.
They got big. Monopoly big, according
to the Department of Justice.
- How many of you use a PC without
Microsoft's operating system?
- Gentlemen, that's a monopoly.
- You were criticized for your
aggressive business tactics
and being anti-competitive.
How do you reflect on that period?
- Well, we were so successful
and one of the great
rewards, if you're, you know,
that successful is the government comes in
and says, okay, you know,
do they have to do things
to help out your competitors?
Did you follow all those rules?
So yes, at that same time
as the internet era was
coming along in the
90s, we were involved in a US
government lawsuit.
Then Brad Smith came along.
- Microsoft President
Brad Smith joined in 1993
as a budding technology lawyer.
You can find him at places
like Davos,
liaising with heads of state
or at Microsoft's Treehouse.
You helped navigate Microsoft
through one of maybe one
of the most challenging
times in corporate history.
Bill said the company could have died
during the antitrust battle.
What stands out to you from that time?
- We needed to figure out
how to resolve disputes
and not just figure what
it might take to win them.
And that really meant making peace.
And when I got the job
of general counsel back in 2001
when I was selected, I said
to Bill and Steve and others, look,
if you wanna go make peace
and negotiate agreements, I'm
probably the right person.
And if you don't wanna do that,
then I'm probably not the right person.
because I had a strategy I believed in.
- We were able to work a
settlement out with the government
and you know, we've been
a lot more aware of, okay,
let's constantly be in
touch with the governments
around the world, make
sure they're good with
what we're doing and that.
And so we haven't had
anything intense like we did
there in the late 90s.
- The Microsoft antitrust
case has relevance
for both Google and Meta today.
Both companies are facing
down lawsuits in a bid
to break up dominant tech
companies once again.
That was sort of the beginning
of a challenging time for
innovation at the company.
Was it bad for Microsoft,
but good for the industry in a way?
- No company will ever
hit every wave better
than everyone else.
It just, that's not the
way the world works.
Now, it is the case that
if you're distracted,
you're much less likely
to hit the next wave.
And I think it is always
worth remembering,
it is a big world.
If you don't hit a wave,
somebody else will.
You have the opportunity
to get the next one.
- Some people will blame
that on the distraction
from the antitrust case.
But some of it really was
just a failure to understand
where the market was going, to understand
what consumers wanted, what
office users wanted, right?
- So they miss search,
they miss mobile.
- Right.
They miss social basically.
And the stock is flat for years.
This is the Steve Balmer era.
- How much do you think this advanced
operating environment is worth?
- Employee number 30 at Microsoft.
Steve Balmer is the energetic,
exuberant sales whiz
who led Microsoft from 2000 to 2014.
He put the big in Big Tech.
- When it was Bill to Steve,
it was sort of obvious
because Steve was the
president of the company.
He had been Bill's co-pilot, if you will,
for basically 20 years.
- When it first stepped
in the role, I said, wow,
this is actually quite different.
I really understood what it means
to be the in "the buck
stops here" position.
- Developers! Developers!
- Developers! Developers! Developers!
It's part of my greatest hits I guess.
And I'll never shake it.
- Your 25th anniversary,
you jumped out of a cake.
I want, I want a do over.
- I don't, I didn't even remember that.
- You know, I miss
Ballmer-style product launches.
Do you think tech's too serious now?
- I always thought,
okay, you're gonna have
fewer characters.
You know, Bill Gates, a
character larger-than-life.
Larry Ellison, a character,
larger-than-life.
Steve Jobs obviously.
And yet I think there's
still some characters.
The AI thing is tricky
because if you don't seem
serious enough then people won't
trust you with the privacy.
You know, the the, the issues
that AI generates uniquely.
So I see a little bit less
of the, "Hey! Let's do the...
- Yeah, yeah,
- The big joker" thing.
'cause it's just tougher
with these kinds of products.
- During Ballmer's tenure,
Microsoft wandered into
its wilderness years,
battling fresh challenges
from Google and search
and Apple and mobile.
A new acronym emerged
that described the big
tech stocks of the moment.
And it didn't include Microsoft.
the company just couldn't
connect with the shifting needs
and tastes of consumers.
The company missed mobile
and social and search.
Do you ever look back and think, what if?
- Not too much actually, you know,
did the company miss search?
No, because it, all the stuff,
including Satya, who worked on
that stuff, all that
stuff is now fundamental
to what's going on in AI.
So yes, there was a cycle
of it the company missed.
The one I would would
highlight is the intelligence
that you carry with you, i.e. your phone.
That's the one I say, ah, and
I know why I, we missed it.
Missed meaning we don't
have a strong position,
we have no position anymore.
But I think that
the company has really
thrived despite that.
I'm proud of that. And
you know, are there things
that Satya's missing right now?
I'm sure you know, 15 years
from now he'll look back
and say [expletive],
could have done that one.
Sorry, oh shoot, could
have done that one better.
But there you have it.
- We ran a bunch of charts that tried
to track his performance.
If you looked at profit,
if you looked at revenue, it went up.
The chart that just
was down was the stock.
And there was just,
it seemed like there
was nothing they could
do right at that point.
And again, it's not totally accurate
to say they missed mobile.
They knew it was gonna be big,
they couldn't figure
out what people wanted.
Bill Gates loved the idea
of a tablet computer,
a pen computer, he called
it in the 90s.
- It's a tablet and there's a pen here.
- He had wanted to do that forever
and they finally released
one and in the early 00s
and it's not something that anyone wants.
And then Steve Jobs gets
up there with the iPad
and it's exactly what
people are looking for.
Now there's a couple of exceptions.
In 2001, they released the Xbox,
which remains the, you know,
the biggest American gaming empire.
It was a tough decision for them to make.
Bill and Steve both were
unsure at various points.
There was a lot of screaming
and yelling around that decision.
Bill, in a very foul-mouthed tirade
at a meeting on Valentine's Day,
accused the team working on it of,
I'm not gonna use this
exact wording on television,
but messing up everything he
had created at the company.
Steve at this point is six weeks
or so into his tenure as CEO,
and this is the first major
decision he has to make.
Am I going to green
light this Xbox or not?
And he decides to go for it, but not
before raking the team over the coals.
That ended up being a
really prescient decision
by Steve Ballmer though.
The other thing that Steve
did that was really important,
he decided to do some really
smart things in terms of cloud
- Ballmer became the bridge
from Microsoft's PC era
to its cloud future, a
transformation sparked
by a competitive threat
next door. Amazon identified
that cloud computing would
be the next opportunity.
So Ballmer put together
a team led by Satya
Nadella to try to catch up
and get a piece of the emerging market.
Microsoft then launched Azure
and brought office apps to the cloud.
- It's a really pivotal moment
because Microsoft at this point
has been surveying customers
about whether they wanna move to the cloud
and customers are telling
them we're not ready.
And so the person that
preceded Satya in that division
basically tells Steve Ballmer
customers don't want it,
we shouldn't move this quickly.
And Steve looks at that
executive, a guy named Bob Muglia
and says, "Well then,
Bob, you're not my guy.
And he replaces him with Satya.
And there's like a
sliding doors moment where
that doesn't happen.
Satya never becomes CEO
and you know, God only
knows where the company is.
- I understand that that Bill spent a lot
of time succession planning
when he handed the reins to you
and that you also spent a lot
of time succession planning.
When you pass the reigns to Satya.
What's the key to building a company
that outlasts its founder?
- It was super important to
let Satya have his space.
- And I think that was a key learning.
'cause when Bill and I, we
sort of had a long handoff,
and so in a sense, the long goodbye
I think is difficult
because role reversal is difficult.
And I think I learned that enough to say,
look, I love you.
I might think I have a
lot you can learn from me.
And I said to him, but
don't listen to old CEOs.
Former CEOs or former CEOs.
You're gonna know what to do
and anything you don't know,
you're gonna figure out.
- What was it about Satya?
Satya was not beholden to the past.
He was not beholden to making
sure that Office help Windows.
And so he was able to make
decisions, I think in a way
that was a little bit freeing.
Steve famously got upset
when employees had iPhones.
Satya wanted everybody
to experience everyone else's
products to know about them.
I remember talking to someone,
an executive from another
company, had been at a conference
with Satya and every single
business leader in the room kept
pulling out their Blackberry,
checking their email.
Satya didn't look at it the
whole day, he just listened.
- Brett, I mean, how confident are you
that Nadella can bring this company
back from where it's been
and sort of restore Microsoft to greatness
and win in the places where it can?
- There's not a tech leader
who doesn't respect Satya Nadella.
He's really taken a, an extremely
complex and large company
and genuinely changed
its culture and strategy
- With Satya, you know, his first reaction
when the succession process was
announced was not to
throw his hat in the ring.
I mean, he literally said,
I don't think you need me.
- Wow. - And then a couple
months later he said, well,
I think maybe you need me.
- This company's had three
CEOs, they're all right here.
This is all,
- Not everybody knew him as well.
He had only been running
the cloud business
for a little less than three years.
If it had been two years later,
I think it would've been obvious.
So it was a bet.
- You are credited with
leading Microsoft's comeback
and you came in as kind of a wartime CEO.
Is it peace time now or is it still war?
- I mean, those metaphors
are interesting to me.
I, I feel like the
Microsoft I grew up in was
that there was no such thing
as, oh wow, we won anything.
So at least the core DNA
and the core posture I've had
in throughout my 32 years at
Microsoft is we better
get our act together
to make sure we are
learning fast enough about
what the next big thing is.
It's all about, hey, are we
being relevant in the future?
That's the only way to survive.
- When Satya Nadella
took the reins in 2014,
he challenged the windows
obsessed hierarchy
and reoriented Microsoft
around the cloud and AI.
It worked and the stock talked
to the delight of Ballmer,
Microsoft's largest shareholder.
- Everything's three times
as big, revenue's three times
as big profit is three oh market caps
more than three times as big.
All good by me. So every, you
know, everything is scaled
so much it's, it's amazing.
- Microsoft surged back
to Wall Street Glory
with the magnificent seven shorthand
for high performing tech stocks
with market caps bigger
than some countries.
The hardest lesson you've learned as CEO?
- I think the hardest one is to be able
to really live that, right?
To deliver the present and
then prepare for the future.
That ability, like as a CEO,
what is it that you have
to do each quarter?
You have to create magic, right?
That's kind of what
every 90 days the market
expects you to create magic.
And that's kind of the reality
of the world we live in.
While at the same time building
a long-term institution
and the accountability that
goes with it, being able to sort
of understand what it takes to have
that ultimate accountability
to both deliver today
and for tomorrow
and to be able to get that balance right.
- It's a much more complex job
today I have to say I'm in,
you know, great admiration for
how zen he is at, you know,
picking the things he's gonna focus on
and all the, you know, choices.
He's very good about
drawing both Steve and I in.
So whatever expertise we have,
he gets the benefit of that,
you know, so I think he's kind of a model.
He wasn't there in the early days
and yet, you know, of all the
tech companies, I think he's,
he's been the best at carrying forward.
Even the original spirit of
what made Microsoft special.
- Nadella's legacy includes big
investments in acquisitions
from LinkedIn, GitHub,
Activision Blizzard to
what some have called
the deal of the decade,
a $13 billion bet on OpenAI.
Microsoft's biggest hit?
- Windows
- Biggest Miss?
- Clippy.
It was just ahead of its time.
It was just ahead of its
time. It's back again.
- Biggest surprise.
- The biggest surprise was maybe,
maybe this OpenAI ChatGPT.
Having a chat interface become a hit
was a real surprise.
- The concept of a chat bot isn't new.
They tried before with Clippy, Cortana
and Tay, the bot that had
to be shut down 16 hours
after launch.
- Soon, Tay was ranting about Hitler.
But ChatGPT was a massive success
giving Microsoft a surprise
jump in the AI race.
The deal with OpenAI, was it
smart, lucky, or a quick fix?
- It's hard to argue
anything other than smart.
The original deal back in, you know, 2019,
nobody really knew if it was
gonna work out the way they said, right?
And Bill Gates opposed
that deal on technological grounds
because Bill thought that
the way that the technology
of the AI market would play out
was gonna be a different way
and that what Sam
and company wanted to do wasn't
gonna be how it would work.
Lucky that they picked
the right horse perhaps.
- The OpenAI Microsoft
partnership delivered a hit.
But there've been some
bumps along the way.
- It is full mutiny within
the world's most important
AI company
- Who's gonna be CEO of OpenAI tomorrow?
- You tell me.
- I will leave it to OpenAI and its board.
- What's Satya like in a crisis?
Satya, to me that
weekend, was like a duck.
He was completely calm above the water
and underneath the water
he was paddling furiously.
You pointed out to me that
quote that about, you know,
Microsoft being above them,
below them, around them
and you know, which sounds kind
of scary, but really it's true.
The contract that Microsoft had struck
and with OpenAI really gave them access
to everything no matter what happened.
And at the same time, things are starting
to change on the basis of that
- Microsoft is building its own models.
OpenAI is making other friends
and your partnership ends in 2030.
Are you trying to tell the kids
that maybe this marriage isn't forever?
- This is another thing I
learned in the last 50 years is,
you know, you approach all partnerships
and create long-term stable
partnerships which are win-win, right?
So I hope that for
decades to come, Microsoft
and OpenAI will be partnered
in variety of different ways.
Will they have other partners? Absolutely.
Will we have other partners? Absolutely.
- But the relationship is changing, right?
Like how is it changing and
what happens when that deal is?
- I think that any company
that has gone from being
a research lab to one
of the most successful
product companies of this age,
obviously things have to change for them
and for us in the context
of the partnership, right?
We have IP rights, we are thrilled about
that access we have, we are
infrastructure providers,
they're the biggest customers of ours.
And so to us, having
that multifaceted sort
of partnership is what
we are really focused on.
And so why would any one
of us want to go upset that
- Still, business is business.
And it seems like there's
always a new twist on tap in
that relentless pursuit
of relevance as we saw
with search in your
competition with Google,
sometimes you just can't fight the verb.
It's habit-forming and ChatGPT
is the verb right now.
So how much do you worry
that Microsoft loses the mind share game
- Every day that ChatGPT succeeds
is a fantastic day for Microsoft,
Right, every time you search on ChatGPT,
Microsoft makes money, right?
Yeah. In some sense it does
prove the point that, you know,
markets can evolve
and new hit products
can be created from
anywhere and what have you.
- How will the AI wars play out?
Like does it feel
different than the mobile
or the browser wars?
Like who wins?
- Well, we don't know.
We know that the level of investment
by the leading companies
is pretty mind blowing.
You know, Google's a great
company, Microsoft, OpenAI.
We're out there, you
know, every day, you know,
making Copilot better.
- You obviously have a
booming enterprise business.
When you look at what Google
is doing and Apple and Meta
and Amazon, how important is it to you
to win in consumer AI
and how do you do that?
- To me, I want us to
play to our strength.
Like if I look at even what we are doing
with copilot, right?
How do we build a Copilot
that's the new browser
effectively in this intelligence
era that has a unique
characteristic of that is Microsoft.
Whether it's helping you
with your travel planning
or whether it's shopping
or with your homework,
but do it in a way that
it uniquely telegraphs
what I think Microsoft's
signature would be in it.
In what is going to be
a new way to litigate
what is the consumer market
- Outside of video games, Xbox, Satya
and team have just not
figured out consumer
and it's becoming
potentially more of an issue
because our generation grew
up in Microsoft products.
The generation that's
in school now does not.
They live in Google,
they have Apple devices.
You have a generation growing up
and the question for Microsoft
is what is their entree
to Microsoft products if they're
not growing up with them?
- Microsoft got a headstart
with exclusive access
to open AI's models,
but the boardroom drama
and Big Tech competition pushed Nadella
to innovate from within.
- Hello.
- Hey, good to see you.
- Great to see you.
Mustafa Suleyman is head of
Microsoft's consumer AI team
who came in-house in a buzzy acquihire.
Suleyman's job is to make
Microsoft's own chatbot, Copilot,
as essential as Excel or
Windows in a big bet on the next
era of computing.
- Everything is about to shuffle.
Whether it's search or the browser or apps
or the operating system.
These models are just
completely different to any one
of those last generations of software.
- So right now you feel like
you have a once-in-a-decade opportunity.
- I really do. I think these next couple
of years are gonna be a defining moment.
We're gonna look back and
be like, this was the era
of real agents, you
know, forming a lasting,
meaningful relationship
with an AI companion
that becomes the primary way
that you do computing in the world.
- He's trying to create a seamless
and futuristic consumer AI experience,
a new mission for Microsoft.
- The number one priority
for us is that we have
to produce beautiful,
elegant, consumer products
that regular young people love, right?
And that is not the way
that young people think
of Microsoft's products today.
And that's a very big
shift in our thinking.
- Microsoft's product suite
still, I think has a lot
of challenges and in
many ways can feel dated
- Like Excel, you're making me cry.
When are we banning Microsoft Outlook?
I spent two hours today
trying to open an email.
You have one job.
How do you make it smarter, but
still simple and delightful?
- So you clearly want it
to reason over your past data,
use your personal information,
and then get really good at taking actions
inside the browser, searching
for things on your behalf.
And that's just an iterative process
that, you know, is gonna take many,
many quarters to come to pass.
- What do you think your approach,
your secret is going to be?
- I think humor is gonna be central.
It's gotta have a sense of itself,
a little bit of character.
It needs to remember
you and know who you are
and that range of personalization,
that's gonna be a key differentiator.
- Alright, we're gonna try
out some different voices
- Looking for answers
or a new perspective?
- Let's chat and figure it out together.
- Whoa!
- I want to hear your big ideas.
- Ooh
- I can write stories, brainstorm ideas,
and I can sound like this if you choose.
- That sounds a lot like Mustafa to me.
- Hey Copilot.
- Does it sound like Mustafa to you?
So I have a big tech conference coming up
and I'm trying to think
of people we should
invite to interview.
Do you have any ideas?
- You could consider
inviting Satya Nadella
for insights on AI and cloud?
Cheryl Sandberg for social
media and leadership.
- I find it interesting that
Satya's your first choice.
Is that because he's your boss?
Not at all.
Are we all just gonna be talking to our
computers and our phones?
Is that the next wave?
- I think the voice is gonna
be one of the next platforms.
It's not gonna replace all
the previous platforms.
It's like a fork.
It enables a completely different way
of talking to your computer.
- No matter which chatbot wins,
demand is expected to grow.
Sending Big Tech on a
massive spending spree.
- Microsoft's putting out
$80 billion of investment.
You know, clearly that's
the sense that, wow,
we have something that
customers are gonna want.
We're willing to invest at a level
that's completely unheard of.
I mean that's, it's a
pretty mind blowing number.
- We're in this new computing era.
Tech giants including you,
are building these AI data centers.
Do you have any concerns about the size
and scale of this bet?
Like are we building the
future the right way?
- I think the the scale
is pretty stunning,
but the real test here, Emily, is
what happens in the real economy?
The real test is not some
benchmark or what have you of AI
It's one simple fact,
which is when we start
seeing higher growth rates
around the world and the
benefits of that growth rate,
by the way, being much more
broader cross-sectorally
and by economic strata,
then I think we would've
achieved something.
- The emergence of deep seek from China.
You told your team to quickly
integrate it into Azure.
Why don't you think it's a risk and
and what do you think of
China's role in this fight?
- The thing that I think about
is there'll always be open
source and if anything,
what DeepSeek is proven
is open source can
come from any place.
In this case it happens
to come from China.
The next model may come
from some other country,
it may come from the
lab in the United States.
It doesn't matter. In this
industry, we better sort
of really face up to the
fact that this is the rate
of diffusion that's faster
than anything before
and it's worldwide.
- There's a version of
AI that's a security
and privacy nightmare.
How do you think about it?
- Well, I think that it's
just an imperative for us
to protect security
and privacy in every aspect of technology.
Whether we're talking
about AI or social media
or the content we created work.
The aspect of AI that is most
interesting is that it is sort
of the ultimate tool
and the ultimate weapon.
- So the question I wanted to address
today is really simple.
What does all this mean?
- Mustafa, shame on you.
You say you, you claim that
you care about using AI
for good, but Microsoft sells
AI weapons to the Israeli
military. You are -
- I hear your protest. Thank you.
- Shame on you.
- Microsoft is a war puppeteer.
Microsoft is a war puppeteer!
Not everyone is along
for the tech industry's
ride to the AI promise land.
There are consequences
and challenges ahead
as this new underlying technology embeds
itself into everything.
Do you think we're gonna
really look back on this march
of progress as positive?
You know, I've heard Bill talk
about how he never thought
that tech could be negative
until the the era of social networking.
I guess I wonder if this
sort relentless march
of progress could in the
future mean fewer jobs,
fewer opportunities, less
meaning in our lives.
- I think it's super important
to acknowledge the uncertainty
around what's gonna unfold
over the next 10 or 20 years.
Anyone who is confident is probably wrong.
And so that means that we
have to be alive to the fact
that this really is different
to other types of technology.
It is not just a simple tool,
it's dynamic, it's emergent,
it adapts to you on the fly.
And that means there could be all kinds
of third degree effects that
are quite hard to predict.
- You've said that the age
of complete human dominance
will be over in 10 years.
What does that really mean for us?
- What it means goes beyond, you know,
which company actually delivers that
or what their stock price is.
It's a much more profound thing
than just like the browser
wars were, I mean it didn't
matter to people really
who won the browser wars.
Here, the capacity,
the intelligence will give
humans a lot of choices.
- It's a complicated picture
for the software giant.
Its mission is the future of work,
but it's investing in technology
that's reshaping the
future of opportunity.
AI powered coding assistance are changing
how software gets built,
automating tasks normally handled
by junior developers.
That's become a bragging
point at the very top.
- And so I would say maybe
20, 30% of the code that is
inside of our reposts today in some
of our projects are probably all written
by software. What about you guys?
- I don't know, maybe half
the development is gonna be
- Done by AI.
- Is AI gonna make engineers obsolete?
- AI is gonna vastly change
the way software gets built.
It will, and yet there's
still gonna be people who have
to figure out what the world needs,
how to give it to 'em.
Will all of the code crunching activities
of yesterday be around tomorrow?
No. A lot of those will go
away. But I, I'm an optimist.
People say, oh, you know, are
you gonna put people out of,
and this happened every time.
- Yeah. - You know, will
this cause a loss of jobs?
Will that cause a lot of jobs?
You know what I'd say?
Somehow the world's always
created new jobs.
It can be hard. The
dislocation people say,
oh shoot, it's my skills,
it became obsolete.
But there will be new
important skills people need.
- What's gonna be the it job
of the future if it was a
software programmer in your era?
- Well, I'm not sure there's any it job.
If you love math and software, great.
Go be a software programmer.
But that was, you know, the
percentage of the labor market
that was, you know, nerdy
people like me, you know,
where you'd be writing code,
you know, is pretty modest.
All of that, those
capabilities where you bring it
as a human, I think will
still be fairly important.
But it is a, a period
where answering these
questions is probably harder
than at any time in history.
- I think it takes like unique
human arrogance to believe
that AI cannot supersede humans.
- But what about that scares you?
- So many things, right?
Like this is like, you know,
what does it mean to build something
that is more capable than
ourselves?
There are folks out there
including Sam Altman
and OpenAI who believe super intelligent,
super powerful AI's right
around the corner. What's your bet?
- I think that we are definitely on a path
to have more powerful systems pretty soon
- Is AGI being built on
Microsoft's campus right now?
Like can we go find it?
- No, you can't find it. It doesn't exist.
- How confident are you
that AI's promise will
outweigh the perils?
- I'm, I'm not confident,
but the, you know, that's,
that's what we need
to get oriented around.
That's why I was surprised AI
wasn't really an issue in the
last election.
It's definitely got to be shaped.
- Hearing you say you're not
confident is kind of scary.
- People should think
through how is AI going
to reshape our lives?
It is, it is a profound change agent.
And you know, I don't think
it should just be the people
who know the technology
because there's a lot of
choices about how it gets used.
It will change learning, it
will change the job market.
And you know, I think we can shape
that in a, in the right way.
But it'll be, you know,
just like nuclear energy,
nuclear weapons.
It'll challenge us.
- Thank you for your vision,
your leadership, your passion,
and for building the
Microsoft that we know today.
A company that has
truly changed the world.
- What is Microsoft in 50
years? Like your best guess?
- I mean a, a Petri dish with
a couple of cells connected
to like an, an AI being
that controls everything.
I don't know that we know
what it is in five years
because we're talking about
the technological innovations
here and how do they lead
with their own product
and not just because they
picked the right model.
Microsoft is preaching this gospel
of AI changing everything
about the way we work.
What Satya wants to see is for that
to be proven out first at Microsoft.
- Microsoft changed the world.
Well, Microsoft changed the world. Again,
- I go back to that founding
moment when Bill said, you know
what, the software industry
didn't exist and he
and Paul sort of said, oh,
we should build software
and hopefully we can monetize it
and they will be an
industry. I mean, it's crazy.
- Hopefully they will come.
- Yeah. And, and it all happened.
But the, the other thing about
it though was that core
of, "Wow, we wanna build software so
that others can create more software."
That I think is what gives us relevance.
I always say this,
longevity is not a goal,
relevance is,
and the framing of this company from 1975
to 2025 has been the same,
which is can you do things
that allow others to do more things?
- If you could time travel to 2075,
what advice would you give your successor?
- The advice I got from Steve Ballmer
when I took on the job is
the advice that I think of all
the time, which is be bold.
Because if you're not bold,
you're not gonna do anything.
And be right because if you're not right,
you won't amount to much.
And so that ability to sort
of get past the status quo
by really boldly thinking of
a future that doesn't exist,
but then executing, right?
At the end of the day,
business is about being able
to earn the stripes one step at a time.
And I think that's what
this company has exhibited.
What has it has taught me all
through my career at Microsoft,
which is you gotta dream
and execute, dream and execute.
And you know, we've not
gotten it always right.
Both, either on the dream
side or on the execution side,
but on the batting average is pretty good.